# Notes  
## Chapter 1  
- Durant posits that there are conditions essential to elevating from "barbarism" to civilization: \[physical\] geological, geographical, economy, culture, \[psychological\] political order, common language, unifying moral code, education, common beliefs
- "For civilization is not something inborn or imperishable; it must be acquired anew by every generation, and any serious interruption in its financing or its transmission may bring it to an end. Man differs from the beast only by education, which may be defined as the technique of transmitting civilization."

## Chapter 2
### Section 1
- The first step man took toward civilization was transitioning from hunting and gathering to farming and animal domestication.
- "...the squirrel that gathered nuts for a later feast, the bees that filled the comb with honey, the ants that laid up stores for a rainy day— these were among the first creators of civilization. It was they... who taught our ancestors the art of providing for tomorrow"

### Section 2
- The path to developing economy began with the discovery of fire. Beyond this, again, man is inspired by nature to develop tools. This then led to trade between people based on the resources native to those peoples. When metals could eventually be mined and shaped, value began to be measured in these metals as opposed to trading of goods. Interestingly metal coins has been the generally accepted form of currency until relatively recently.
- "[Man] imitated the tools and industry of the animal: he saw the monkey flinging rocks and fruit upon his enemies, or breaking open nuts and oysters with a stone; he saw the beaver building a dam, the birds making nests and bowers, the chimpanzees raising something very like a hut."

### Section 3
- In this section, Durant explores the natural evolution from the communist economy of hunters and gatherers, who had no notion of ownership and property, to an economy of ownership, trade, social classes, and slavery. Though this transition to ownership and property perhaps emerged several thousand years ago, the foundations for economies today are little different. Only recently has slavery become obsolete through enlightened moral understanding, however we can find many modern examples of the socially and economically strong taking advantage of and benifitting from the labor of those less powerful.
- "Gradually, through agriculture and slavery, through the division of labor and the inherent diversity of men, the comparative equality of natural society was replaced by inequality and class divisions. “In the primitive group we find as a rule no distinction between slave and free, no serfdom, no caste, and little if any distinction between chief and followers .” Slowly the increasing complexity of tools and trades subjected the unskilled or weak to the skilled or strong; every invention was a new weapon in the hands of the strong, and further strengthened them in their mastery and use of the weak."

## Chapter 3
### Section 1
- Durant begins this chapter by demonstrating how individuals dislike government, but acquiesce to it because they also desire social interaction and the safety that a governed community provides. The natural violent interactions between clans and peoples spurned the centralization of authority.
- "It is war that makes the chief, the king and the state, just as it is these that make war... primitive life was incarnadined with intermittent war... Property was the mother, war was the father, of the state."

### Section 2
- This section covers the necessity of the state and the tools used to "indoctrinate" the governed to the machinations of the state. The state formed as a response to aggression from hunter groups to raid farms for food. Although humans are naturally disinclined to be restricted or "dominated" by the state, this was preferable as it helped develop the social relationships, through trade regulations and laws, that helped to maintain internal peace.
- "Hence the state, in order to maintain itself, used and forged many instruments of indoctrination— the family, the church, the school— to build in the soul of the citizen a habit of patriotic loyalty and pride."

### Section 3
- Before social law, the hunting tribes and clans abided by a code of retribution and revenge. This resolution for settling grievances persisted into many codified laws, including Hamurrabis law and Roman law. Courts were created to hold the more socially powerful (chiefs, kings, etc.) accountable for crimes.
- "The first stage in the evolution of law is personal revenge... The second step toward law and civilization in the treatment of crime was the substitution of damages for revenge... a third step towards law was taken by the formation of courts; the chief or the elders or the priests sat in judgment to settle the conflicts of their people... The fourth advance in the growth of law was the assumption, by the chief or the state, of the obligation to prevent and punish wrongs... So the chief becomes not merely a judge but a lawgiver; and to the general body of “common law” derived from the customs of the group is added a body of “positive law,” derived from the decrees of the government"

### Section 4
- This is a fascinating section focused on the adaptation of the family unit through the transition to civilization. The "naturally social" groups, or the hunting and gathering groups, relied heavily on the women to maintain the family while the men mostly rested and prepared for hunts. The women were revered in these groups as the maintainers of the home, the children and the group. Through the transition to more complex society, women were subjugated to the, more physically strong, men. Fathers, eldest brothers or husbands treated women as property and this was socially reinforced through traditions of the father arranging or approving marriages, deities portrayed as male, and in some cases including women as items in trade for goods. In many modern societies, we have begun to see a transition to gender equality, but more traditional societies still very much view women in this way.
- "Gradually the man had his way: fatherhood became recognized, and property began to descend through the male; mother- right yielded to father-right; and the patriarchal family, with the oldest male at its head, became the economic, legal, political and moral unit of society. The gods, who had been mostly feminine, became great bearded patriarchs, with such harems as ambitious men dreamed of in their solitude."

## Chapter 4
### Section 1
- Very few animals practice true monogamy, something akin to marriage for us today. Primitive man, similarly, rarely practiced monogamy but instead practiced, what Durant views as, sexual communism. Through the transition to society that values property and ownership, men preferred monogamous relationships to control who inherits their possessions. Some societies practiced polygyny, one man having multiple wives, as women were viewed as servants of the household and allowed the man to produce more children - a commodity in early societies, but this practice was reserved for the wealthy.
- "Marriage is older than man... But monogamy, like letters and the state, is artificial, and belongs to the history, not to the origins, of civilization... In all these forms and varieties of marriage there is hardly a trace of romantic love... but usually these attachments have nothing to do with marriage. In simple days men married for cheap labor, profitable parentage, and regular meals."

### Section 2
- This section demonstrates how even the practice of sex and the view of virginity was flipped on its head when man began to focus on ownership and property. Virginity was seen as undesirable in a potential mate in natural societies, but was preferable in more advanced as it assured no contention of ownership between their children and those the woman may have had before.
- "The institutions, conventions, customs and laws that make up the complex structure of a society are the work of a hundred centuries and a billion minds; and one mind must not expect to comprehend them in one lifetime, much less in twenty years. We are warranted in concluding that morals are relative, and indispensable."

### Section 3
- "In general, dishonesty rises with civilization, because under civilization the stakes of diplomacy are larger, there are more things to be stolen, and education makes men clever... Moral progress in history lies not so much in the improvement of the moral code as in the enlargement of the area within which it is applied... Morals, then, are soon endowed with religious sanctions, because mystery and supernaturalism lend a weight which can never attach to things empirically known and genetically understood; men are more easily ruled by imagination than by science."

### Section 4
- This is a long, yet fascinating, section about the development and utility of religion to all forms of society. The general point to take away from this section is that religion began as a way to reconcile processes or situations outside of the understanding or control of those who practiced. The personfication of the sun, predatory animals, the process of procreation and birth, allowed them to understand and deal with their fear of lacking control over these things. 
- "Fear, as Lucretius said, was the first mother of the gods... so fear graduated into love; the ritual of ancestorworship, probably generated by terror, later aroused the sentiment of awe, and finally developed piety and devotion... This ancestor-worship was so well adapted to promote social authority and continuity, conservatism and order, that it soon spread to every region of the earth. It flourished in Egypt, Greece and Rome, and survives vigorously in China and Japan today; many peoples worship ancestors but no god."

## Chapter 5
- This chapter is broken into three parts that finish describing the last important aspects of developing a civilization, what Durant calls "The Mental Elements" of civiilzation: letters, science and art. It's notable that much of our language used today is derived from these ancient words used to describe objects of importance then. An illuminating example could be moon and month. These seem to have a similar root, and this would make sense as we realize that time, since it's conception, was measured by the phases of the moon. Counting and measurement are the most likely systems that gave birth to the process of science, as these were the most practical applications of mathematics, lovingly described as the language of science. Finally, Durant lays the case for art having originated in elaborate mating practices. As animals have rituals or certain physical qualities to help them stand our in mating practices, so too did the people in natural societies through cosmetics, body piercings and skin stretching. Durant believes this was the first expression of 'art', which he defines to be pleasing to the beholder. From this, and through discovery of natural resources to paint and sculpt, came pottery, sculptures, instruments, etc.. Finally, Durant beautifully summarizes the past 5 chapters to lead us to how these properties, practices, and principles of natural peoples lead to the first civilizations.
- "In these ways precivilized men created the forms and bases of civilization. Looking backward upon this brief survey of primitive culture, we find every element of civilization except writing and the state. All the modes of economic life are invented for us here: hunting and fishing, herding and tillage, transport and building, industry and commerce and finance. All the simpler structures of political life are organized: the clan, the family, the village community, and the tribe; freedom and order— those hostile foci around which civilization revolves— find their first adjustment and reconciliation; law and justice begin. The fundamentals of morals are established: the training of children, the regulation of the sexes, the inculcation of honor and decency, of manners and loyalty. The bases of religion are laid, and its hopes and terrors are applied to the encouragement of morals and the strengthening of the group. Speech is developed into complex languages, medicine and surgery appear, and modest beginnings are made in science, literature and art. All in all it is a picture of astonishing creation, of form rising out of chaos, of one road after another being opened from the animal to the sage. Without these “savages,” and their hundred thousand years of experiment and groping, civilization could not have been. We owe almost everything to them— as a fortunate, and possibly degenerate, youth inherits the means to culture, security and ease through the long toil of an unlettered ancestry."
